---
layout: post
title: "GNU Make"
date: "August 30, 2017"
categories: ['pipelines']
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# Format

THe format of a make command is 

{% highlight make %}
targets : dependencies
  actions
{% endhighlight %}

The program will check the time stamp and make sure that the target was compiled after the dependencies. To update only the time stamp of a file do `touch file`.

Files like input files and code scripts should go in the dependencies section whereas output files should go into the targets section. It is also helpful to name the code scripts by the order in which they are called, for better readability. 

Fake targets can be generated like so
{% highlight make %}
.PHONY : clean
clean :
  rm -f *
{% endhighlight %}

It can be useful when calling with wildcards. In the example below, an action is not required.

{% highlight make %}
.PHONY : all
all : target target2
{% endhighlight %}

# Set Variables

To set and call variables
{% highlight make %}
R=/home/bin/Rscript
$(R)
{% endhighlight %}

Variables can be set in an external file and incorporated into the Makefile.

{% highlight make %}
include configure.mk
{% endhighlight %}

# Automatic Variables

* `$@` target
* `$<` dependencies
* `$^` first dependency
* `$*` pattern match to %
* `$(@D)` directory of target dir/foo -> dir
* `$(@F)` file of target dir/foo -> foo
* `$(<D)`
* `$(<F)` dir/file of first dependency
* `$(^D)`
* `$(^F)` dir/file of dependencies

# Wildcards

Wildcard rules can be declared like so

{% highlight make %}
%.dat : books/%.txt wc.py
	python wc.py $< $*.dat
{% endhighlight %}

`%` can only be used in targets/dependencies, `$*` can be used to match `%`.

It can be called with an actual file name

{% highlight make %}
all : something.dat
{% endhighlight %}

# Functions

* `$(subst from, to, text)` replace each occurrence of from to to in text
* `$(patsubst pattern, replacement, text)` replaces pattern in text with replacement; only changes it once; could be % which is a wildcard
* `$(strip string)` removes whitespace on ends
* `$(findstring find, in)` searches for find in in
* `$(filter pattern, text)` returns all words in text that matches pattern
* `$(filter-out pattern, text)` opposite of filter
* `$(sort list)` sorts the list
* `$(word n, text)` returns nth word of text; start from 1
* `$(wordlist s, e, text)` returns list of words in text starting with word s and ending with e
* `$(words text)` number of words in text
* `$(firstword names)` first word in list
* `$(lastword names)` last word in list

* `$(dir names)` directory
* `$(notdir names)` filename
* `$(suffix names)` file suffixes
* `$(basename names)` file name w/o suffix
* `$(addsuffix suffix, names)` adds a suffix to file names
* `$(addprefix prefix, names)` adds a prefix to file names
* `$(join list1, list2)` vectorized paste
* `$(wildcard pattern)` regex

* `$(shell cmd)` run a shell command

# Running Make

{% highlight make %}
# run the Makefile
make

# writes out specific commands that need to be run
make -n

# runs a specific rule called help
make help
{% endhighlight %}

# Example

{% highlight make %}
include config.mk

TXT_FILES=$(wildcard books/*.txt)
DAT_FILES=$(patsubst books/%.txt, %.dat, $(TXT_FILES))
PNG_FILES=$(patsubst books/%.txt, %.png, $(TXT_FILES))

## all         : Generate Zipf summary table and plots of word counts.
.PHONY : all
all : results.txt $(PNG_FILES)

## results.txt : Generate Zipf summary table.
results.txt : $(DAT_FILES) $(ZIPF_SRC)
	$(ZIPF_EXE) $(DAT_FILES) > $@

## dats        : Count words in text files.
.PHONY : dats
dats : $(DAT_FILES)

%.dat : books/%.txt $(COUNT_SRC)
	$(COUNT_EXE) $< $@

## pngs        : Plot word counts.
.PHONY : pngs
pngs : $(PNG_FILES)

%.png : %.dat $(PLOT_SRC)
	$(PLOT_EXE) $< $@

## clean       : Remove auto-generated files.
.PHONY : clean
clean :
	rm -f $(DAT_FILES)
	rm -f $(PNG_FILES)
	rm -f results.txt

## variables   : Print variables.
.PHONY : variables
variables:
	@echo TXT_FILES: $(TXT_FILES)
	@echo DAT_FILES: $(DAT_FILES)
	@echo PNG_FILES: $(PNG_FILES)

.PHONY : help
help : Makefile
	@sed -n 's/^##//p' $<
{% endhighlight %}
